**Intense Tech with Defense Mech â€“ What's New in LSDj v9.2!**
-Posted August 29, 2021 by [DEFENSE MECHANISM](https://defensemech.com)

Hello and welcome to another edition of Intense Tech! This time I'll be covering the changes and 
updates from LSDj v9.1.0 to 9.2.H. Some changes are subtle, but some are big enough to be 
potentially quite impactful to your workflow, so let's get started!

Emulation Station
-----------------

First things first, if you're using a Gameboy emulator, you'll want to ensure that it is compatible 
with this version. The latest versions of [BGB](https://bgb.bircd.org/), 
[Sameboy](https://sameboy.github.io/), [Gambatte](https://github.com/sinamas/gambatte), and 
[Emulicious](https://emulicious.net/) are compatible.

*Note: If you're using BGB, a popular option for Windows, you'll want to make sure that it is at 
least version 1.5.9 or later. This version is fully compatible with the changes that have been made 
since version 9.1.C of LSDj.*

Other emulators have been tested but they don't offer the same compatibility as the above-mentioned 
options. This will result in funny volume behavior in pulse and noise channels - this version uses 
new methods to generate the volume envelopes which aren't implemented in other emulators. You could 
try other options at your own peril, but these four options are tested and working.

Now on to the changes!

A Smooth Sound All Around
-------------------------

One of the biggest changes involves sample playback. The timing routine has been completely revamped 
from the ground up to increase the precision of sample playback. Combined with new kit generation in 
the latest LSDPatcher, it results in much cleaner, smoother sample playback. Let's hear some direct 
comparisons of the old stock kits from version 9.1 to the new stock kits in 9.2:

![Sample playback in LSDj 9.1.C vs 9.2.H with stock kits](../media/stocksamples.mp4)

If you have the original sources for your own custom samples, it may be worth taking the time to 
re-patch them for improved quality (make sure you're using LSDPatcher v 1.11.5 or later). But even 
if not, kits will still sound better in 9.2 than they did in versions 9.1 and earlier. Clarity is 
evident in the high frequencies, so things like cymbals really shine. To me, this is worth the 
upgrade alone.  Let's hear a few examples of custom kits patched into v9.1.C versus 9.2.H:

![Sample playback in LSDj 9.1.C vs 9.2.H with custom kits](../media/customsamples.mp4)

Adjust A Phase
--------------

Among other changes and improvements to the wave channel (waves are no longer inverted or displaced 
by one sample!), the PHASE setting has been revamped. Among the options are now the following:

 * PINCH
 * WARP
 * RESYNC
 * RESYN2

PINCH and WARP are both similar to the old "NORMAL" phase but much smoother due to better 
interpolation, and in the case of PINCH, reduced DC offset. RESYNC is also similar to the old RESYNC 
but again has been made smoother due to better interpolation, making it sound more similar to the 
old RESYN2. The new RESYN2 is in fact just the regular old RESYNC phase, for when you really want to 
get dirty with aliasing.

You can hear the examples in the video below using a standard square wave:

![New synth PHASE](../media/new-phase.mp4)

Noise Notes
-----------

Although previous versions of LSDj have featured a noise instrument setting called "S MODE" which 
allowed changing between "FREE" and "STABLE", sometimes even the STABLE setting did not prevent the 
noise channel from randomly muting on hardware when switching values. The cause was unknown for a 
long time, but it was suspected to be related to changing from a long-loop noise value to a 
short-loop noise value. Recently, however, it was discovered that even changing values within 
short-loop or long-loop values could cause random mutes in the noise channel. This behavior led to 
the implementation of new noise "PITCH" setting in v9.1.3.

When PITCH is set to FREE, it functions like the old STABLE mode and restarts the noise channel only 
when switching from long-loop to short-loop noise. When PITCH is set to SAFE, the noise channel is 
restarted on *every* value change. The resulting sound is less smooth than FREE pitch, but is 
guaranteed never to mute. Compare the resulting sounds in the videos below:

![Noise FREE vs SAFE pitch](../media/safe-noise.mp4)

As a quick aside -- it's worth mentioning also that noise instruments now have a TRANSP setting!

You'll ENVy the New Visualizer
------------------------------

One big improvement resulting in added user-friendliness (aside from the many new tooltips that can 
be accessed by tapping A,A on various parameters) is the new ENV visualizer for pulse and noise 
instruments! It's now possible to receive both visual and audio feedback of your instrument 
envelopes, hopefully resulting in less overall confusion. You can check out an example in the video 
below:

![ENV Visualizer](../media/env-visualizer.mp4)

RESYNC Wave Instrument Setting
------------------------------

No, you didn't read this wrong - there is another new RESYNC setting, this time found in the wave 
instrument screen. RESYNC functions just like PINGPONG except it disables silky wave. This can be 
handy for a couple of scenarios: one, using SPEED 1 to generate a low undertone (as functioned 
previously in versions 7.3.3 and below); two, using slower SPEED to switch wave frames exactly in 
time (this is very noticeable when playing low bass notes). See the examples in this video:

![Wave instrument RESYNC](../media/resync-inst.mp4)

A Hybrid Approach
-----------------

If you've ever wanted the ability to jump between song rows while the song is playing but without 
switching to LIVE mode, this feature will be a welcome addition. It's now possible to queue song 
rows in SONG mode by pressing Left+Start during playback.

![Queueing rows in SONG mode](../media/song-queue.mp4)

Memory Loss
-----------
 
In consideration of future changes, some of the memory has been freed up in order to open up more 
possibilities in later versions. Song rows have been reduced from `FF` to `BF`, and speech synth 
words have been reduced from 42 to 14, with word name length being shortened from 4 letters down to 
3. What will this memory be used for in the future...???

Various Visual Tweaks
---------------------

As with the update in 9.0.1 to have superfast play position indicators (the triangles that move 
quickly in tables), the rest of the screen has also been modified to update at 60 fps. This results 
in an overall snappier feeling especially on DMG hardware. Other minor visual tweaks include:

 * More visible wave screen cursor
 * Slight tweak to screen map
 * Swapped CUTOFF and Q synth parameters
 * And more...???
